Doppler Effect
==============

Most people know about the *Doppler Effect*, some without knowing it, some had
to go through a Doppler ultrasound, some of us even know it causes the slide of
the sound in sirens passing by... 

.. youtube:: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JZTKhswn684

**Definition**: The Doppler effect (or Doppler shift), is the change in
frequency of a wave (or other periodic event) for an observer moving relative to
its source.

So what does that mean?

Sound and light are waves:

.. image:: /_static/Wave.JPG

To perceive one of these, we need an emitter, and an observer, for the siren
example, the ambulance siren is the emitter, and the microphone recording the
sound, is the observer.

But as the emitter moves toward the observer, the wavelength are shortened, once
the ambulance has passed the observer, it gets further away from the observer,
and the wavelength is getting longer.

When the wavelength is shorter, a sound will have a higher pitch, once the
wavelength gets longer, the sound will have a lower pitch, thus creating the
change you can hear when the ambulance passes by.

A representation of the wave of a moving emitter:

.. image:: /_static/500px-Doppler_effect_diagrammatic.svg.png

There are a lot of usage for this effect, but 2 are more known to the public:

- Car Speed Radar
- Doppler ultrasound

So when the police measure car speed to give you a ticket, they are using the
exact same principle, the radar will beam a wave at a known frequency, and
receive the beam reflected by the vehicle, having its wavelength impacted by the
vehicle speed, Based on the difference, the device will determine the speed.

In the case of  Doppler ultrasound used in medical imaging, it is actually used
to measure the flow of blood in the body.

Finally, I would add that the expansion rate of the universe, is measured using
`redshift <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redshift>`_ which are an example of the
Doppler effect.

For more examples of its usage, and more detailed explanations, don't forget to
check `Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect>`_ page, which is
quite complete!

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: science, sound, doppler, wave
.. comments::
