Maillard Reaction
=================

Did you know that seared steak, bread crust, French fries and more are coming
from the same exact chemical reaction? It is called the *Maillard Reaction*, you
can read more about it on `Wikipedia
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maillard_reaction>`_. It is one of the two
Nonenzymatic browning, the second is the caramelization. There also are other
`Food Browning <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Browning_(food_process)>`_ that may
be worth a read if you are interested in the subject.

Back to the *Maillard Reaction*, the basic point is that amino acids and
reducing sugar gets combined. Most of the time, heat is what triggers the
reaction, but it can also happen without it in various cases, the more sugar and
amino acids the lower the temperature required is.

One thing is for sure, in the case of meat, you will need far more than what can
be achieved by water, that's why boiled meat won't get brown, and taste
different. That is why some recipes will require you to fry meat before adding
them to the stock.

Want to give it a try for yourself? You can follow the steps of this `experience
<https://www.exploratorium.edu/cooking/meat/activity-maillard.html>`_, it is
worth a try!

Interesting for Malt lovers, this reaction is also used to prepare the malt used
in whiskey and beers, that is what gives it its color. There is a very
interesting `article
<http://www.popsci.com/science/article/2012-12/beersci-how-beer-gets-its-color>`_
that goes in length about it if you wish to find out more.

And here is a video about *Maillard Reaction* and caramelization by
`foodsciencetv <http://www.youtube.com/user/foodsciencetv?feature=watch>`_:

.. youtube:: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KhLZ2_KTqf4

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: food, cooking, chemicals, science
.. comments::
